docs: update user description document (#409)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/design/users.qmd

{{< include ../_wip.qmd >}}

## Data and Action types

We have chosen to use the CRUD framework when documenting interactions

> between users and data. There are two types of data in Seedcase Sprout,

Reviewer: Wait, do we have three kinds? With user data?

Reviewer: Or even four with project data? 
...maybe I'm getting ahead of myself

Author: I'll go with three for now

Research data and data about Research data (metadata).

The research data is the data that a user of Seedcase Sprout wish to
store, this can be a variety of formats, although Sprout - in its
current iteration - will handle only tabular data. The metadata (data
about data), it the data the a user creates in preparation for storing
research data. It is expected that almost all users of Seedcase Sprout
will have access to create research data, but only some will have the

> option to create, update, and/or delete metadata and research data.

Author: Yes, should we keep it here until further notice?

We believe that it is important to build a system which offers the
greatest amount of flexibility for the users, which also means that it
will be possible for a high level user (referred to below as Users

> Access Administrators) to be able to customize access for their own

Author: Good point

users. We do at the same time acknowledge that not all teams will want
to set their own user groups up, which is why we aim to offer a set of
'ready-made' user groups as described below.

Some data will need to be manually processed and cleaned by the users
before being inputted. Sprout will not clean the data itself, but it
will highlight which items violate the pre-defined data types (where for
instance TBC has been entered instead of a date). This type of data
entry errors need human attention to fix before they can correctly be

> put into Sprout.

Reviewer: Very nice but also not directly related to users and descriptions of them. So maybe also move this out to another post?

## User types

Sprout is built for the target users described below. It is important to

> note that it is possible for an individual to have more than one role,
> if they are to do everything we would expect them to have the role of
> Super User/Data Owner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
note that it is possible for an individual to have more than one role.
If they are to do everything we would expect them to have the role of
Project owner.

The table below shows the four actions (*create*, *read*, *update*, and *delete*), the types of data (*research data*, *metadata*, and *user data*) and which user types that are allowed to do which actions on which type of data.
```

> | Action | Type of information | DMA | DC  | PO | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Action | Type of data | DMA | DC  | PO | 
```

|--------|---------------------|-----|-----|-----|
| Create | Research Data       | X   | X   | X   |
|        | Metadata            | X   |     | X   | 
|        | User Data           |     |     | X   | 
| Read   | Research Data       | X   | ?   | X   | 
|        | Metadata            | ?   |     | X   | 
|        | User Data           | X   |     | X   | 
| Update | Research Data       | X   |     | X   | 
|        | Metadata            | X   |     | X   | 
|        | User Data           |     |     | X   | 
| Delete | Research Data       | ?   |     | X   | 
|        | Metadata            | ?   |     | X   | 

> |        | User Data           |     |     | X   | 

Reviewer: There's something about the ordering that doesn't make sense to me. Either have the one with least access first: DC, DMA, and then PO, or the one with access to everything first: PO, DMA, then DC :)

> | Create | Research Data       | X   | X   | X   |
> |        | Metadata            | X   |     | X   | 
> |        | User Data           |     |     | X   | 
> | Read   | Research Data       | X   | ?   | X   | 
> |        | Metadata            | ?   |     | X   | 
> |        | User Data           | X   |     | X   | 
> | Update | Research Data       | X   |     | X   | 
> |        | Metadata            | X   |     | X   | 
> |        | User Data           |     |     | X   | 
> | Delete | Research Data       | ?   |     | X   | 
> |        | Metadata            | ?   |     | X   | 
> |        | User Data           |     |     | X   | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Create | Research data       | X   | X   | X   |
|        | Metadata            | X   |     | X   | 
|        | User data           |     |     | X   | 
| Read   | Research data       | X   | ?   | X   | 
|        | Metadata            | ?   |     | X   | 
|        | User data           | X   |     | X   | 
| Update | Research data       | X   |     | X   | 
|        | Metadata            | X   |     | X   | 
|        | User data           |     |     | X   | 
| Delete | Research data       | ?   |     | X   | 
|        | Metadata            | ?   |     | X   | 
|        | User data           |     |     | X   | 
```

> <!--TODO Talk about the ? items-->

Reviewer: Good questions. What are your thoughts on this @lwjohnst86 ?

### Data Management Administrators (DMA)

> Data Management Administrators are responsible for the database itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data management administrators are responsible for the database itself
```

and the quality of the data that gets entered into Sprout. We assume
that they will be people familiar with the research data. They are the
people primarily responsible for dealing with creating and updating
metadata.

These users will:

> -   Log in and set up table structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Log in and set up the metadata structure.
```

-   Complete metadata (in particular the description of individual data
    fields).

> -   Be on call for potential data issues that the people uploading data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Be on call for potential data issues that the Data contributors (described below)
```

    can't resolve.

### Data Contributors (DC)

Data contributors will be uploading or inputting collected data into
Sprout. We assume that these users are from authorized research or data

> collection centers and are researchers, technicians, or other research

Reviewer: technicians?

Author: Don't think this was mine originally, so over to @lwjohnst86 to see if there is another term to use here?

personnel. They are the people responsible for inputting data into the

> database of a specific Data Resource managed by Sprout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database managed by Sprout.
```
Maybe it's fine to remove the mention of a "data resource" here? Otherwise it would be nice to include a link to the definition of what that is :)

These users will upload data in a format determined by the metadata

> defined by the Data Management Admin. In time it is expected that these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defined by the Data management administrator(s). These
```

> users will also have potential access to forms where data can be entered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users will also have access to forms where data can be entered
```

directly (eg. during a clinic consultation), or upload other types of

> data (eg. scans or images).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data (eg. scans or images) when these features are added to Sprout.
```
Or something like that?

These users will be able to:

-   Log in and upload standardised and routine data through a web portal

>     into pre-defined table structures set up by the DMA or SU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    into pre-defined metadata (i.e., table structures) set up by the Data management administrator(s) or Project owner(s).
```

### Project Owner (PO)

> The Project Owner is the person who can do everything in the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Project owner has access to everything in Sprout and can do all four actions to all types of data in Sprout. 
```

Often this will be the same person that has set up the instance of

> Seedcase Sprout, and as can be seen in the table above they have access
> to all four action types for all three types of information. This will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seedcase Sprout. This will
```

> also be the person who in later versions of Seedcase will potentially

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also be the person who in later versions of the Seedcase ecosystem will
```

current iteration - will handle only tabular data. The metadata (data
about data), it the data the a user creates in preparation for storing
research data. It is expected that almost all users of Seedcase Sprout
will have access to create research data, but only some will have the
option to create, update, and/or delete metadata and research data.

We believe that it is important to build a system which offers the
greatest amount of flexibility for the users, which also means that it
will be possible for a high level user (referred to below as Users
Access Administrators) to be able to customize access for their own
users. We do at the same time acknowledge that not all teams will want
to set their own user groups up, which is why we aim to offer a set of
'ready-made' user groups as described below.

Some data will need to be manually processed and cleaned by the users
before being inputted. Sprout will not clean the data itself, but it
will highlight which items violate the pre-defined data types (where for
instance TBC has been entered instead of a date). This type of data
entry errors need human attention to fix before they can correctly be

> put into Sprout.

Reviewer 2: This text would fit better in another location, maybe `data-flow` (that I am soon to move over from the main design docs).

Author: Shall we keep it here for now, and then move it when the rest is moved?

## User types

Sprout is built for the target users described below. It is important to
note that it is possible for an individual to have more than one role,
if they are to do everything we would expect them to have the role of
Super User/Data Owner.

> | Action | Type of information | DMA | DC  | UAA | PA  |

Reviewer 2: We had discussed during one of the meetings that it would be three users: project owner, project admin, and data contributor. I have them partly described in the C4 models in #405

Author: I was thinking that it might be relevant to have a role that you could assign to an uploader, if they need to be able to help with user admin without having access to the data itself, but I'll take it out for now.
